## And You're Wondering About Clients? ##

It is a good thing to wonder about your clients. The amazing thing about hanging out your shingle as a Shopify developer is the sheer unbridled variety of clients you will meet. If you are like me and enjoy sticking pins in maps, working with Shopify merchants will probably push you to buy a Costco-size box of pins for your world map. Like the Ham Radio operators of yesteryear, collecting merchant shops from far off countries and cities to work on is neat. I still have no hits from Easter Island but I am holding out hope. 

Before corporations caught on and heard all about the Internet, there was little or no online ecommerce. Orders from Amazon for books and cake decorating tools with next-day delivery to your door? Not much chance of that a mere decade or so ago. As Nortel sacrificed itself on the alter of corporate greed, after laying fibre optic networks for everyone, high speed Internet bootstrapped a new age of electronic goldrush and now *everyone* wants in on that action.

Some merchants understand that while Shopify does not try to offer everything to everybody, what it does offer is sufficient for most of their immediate needs. There are also plenty of merchants that approach Shopify with notions of what they *think* they need to succeed at e-commerce and so when you tell them Shopify does not support their needs directly and for free, they pop off like bottle rockets. These little conflicts are great and provide opportunity to argue from both sides of the fence. Some merchants make a good case but they cannot realistically use Shopify without sacrificing something fundamental in their business objectives. Internationalization is one of those issues. Many merchants need to serve their customers in more than one language and Shopify does not work in more than one language. Although these merchants are in the minority, the only resolution for them is to open up a shop per language and try and strike a deal with Shopify in the process. Luckily, since templates and inventory can be bulk exported and imported, this is less of a concern than it seems at first.

Other common problems that merchants point out: 
- Shopify can't do one page checkout, oh my god that sucks!
- I can't pre-program the Discount Code! Gah! That's terrible!
- I can't just change the price by 10% when they order 2 or more? That is just wrong!

After six years or so, we can be sure Shopify support staff are also pretty tired of hearing the same complaints. As time passes, the Shopify platform has grown and extended in capabilities but it has shown a certain amount of resilience too. Faced with the choice of trying to do too much or just doing what it does do well, Shopify has embraced the philosophy of doing what it does well. 

### Merchants Respond to Clear Explanations ###

A good way of explaining to merchants why Shopify cannot just add a feature they need is the story about Javascript. Javascript is the lingua franca of all web browsers today. It was created in about 10 days by a programmer with lots of experience at developing languages. Today it is part of every smartphone, every iPad tablet and all desktop web browsers. For all the flaws Javascript has, it remains much the same today as when it was created. It turns out that you cannot put the genie back in the bottle once it has been released. Shopify cannot undo the patterns laid down six years ago either. Software is probably mankind's most fiendishly difficult invention and so we have little choice but to go with what works for as long as possible. We do not want to tinker with a working formula. Right Coke? When Coke changed their formula, they quickly learned the meaning of a marketing department disaster. 

If a merchant complains about checkout, it is fair to ask them where they get the data supporting the case that one page checkout converts sales better than multipage checkouts. Are there enough Ph.D dissertations awarded that clearly show that result with certainty? Discount codes are another interesting trend these days. As Groupon and Living Social have demonstrated handing out coupons to people can be really good for increasing business. Shopify has one text input on the second page of checkout and it cannot be scripted. Merchants have complained that customers are missing that field and making mistakes. It is hard to see how to really improve this process without a lot more experimentation and tweaking but soon enough, it will come to pass that checkout is made even easier. 

### Merchants Want Variable Pricing ###

In Shopify, a product has no price. Only a product's variants have a price. A price on a variant cannot change at any point in a customer's shopping session. You cannot make a price higher or lower through any kind of scripting or fiddling. You just cannot do that. It often comes up that merchants will want to bundle products together and if a customer buys an entire bundle, it should result in cheaper prices for the products. Shopify does not work that way. If you bundle three products that cost $10 each together when they go in the cart they still cost $10 each. The bundle costs $30. It cannot be $25 if it is composed of three $10 products. The way to bundle products cheaper would be to make a product with all three products and price that product cheaper. That can be a difficult process for some merchants.

The *ideal merchant* will understand that opening an ecommerce shop is a tough business to start. Working with merchants, you want to get them online and making sales. They need to be found by search engines and they need customers. As customers find their shop and they make sales, it naturally becomes easier to show them that they can spend a little money on their theme and make their shop beautiful. They can then be convinced to take the next step and perhaps add some custom coding to make product customizations a reality and to use Apps to assist with their order processing. It is rarely a one-size-fits-all strategy and often there are more than a couple of ways to use Shopify to make a sale.
