## The Shopify API ##

One of the most interesting features of Internet computing that has evolved since the 1990's has been the introduction and growth of service oriented companies that work strictly using Internet protocols. YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, Shopify and multitudes of other companies that run from modest brick and mortar headquarters, have relatively small employee head counts but count millions and perhaps billions of users. Little of their success can be attributed to pounding the pavement door to door or by TV advertising. Service oriented companies leverage the Internet itself for their growth and one of the underlying reasons for their rapid growth, adoption and success is due the concept of the public API or Application Programming Interface. 

What better way to introduce the public to a service than to allow them to build it, populate it and enjoy it using their own labour and tools. YouTube, Facebook and Twitter would not exist without user generated content. How to ensure everyone can contribute to your service without being overly technical or specialized? How to accept a video from an iPhone or Android phone, an iPad or Galaxy Tablet, a Mac or a PC? The key is the use and promotion of an API. Provide a simple mechanism everyone can take advantage of and the ball starts rolling.

Shopify released their API platform after some years of processing a steadily growing number of transactions (perhaps some would see it as explosive growth). A period of time during which Shopify learned not only to understand the intimate details of what happens when millions of dollars flow through Internet cash registers, but also the huge number of possibilities and limitations that can be faced by a single codebase. Once the early adopter merchants crossed the chasm and became profitable enterprises there was a corresponding demand and need for introducing better order processing. 

The API platform uses the software architecture known as **RE**presentational **S**tate **T**ransfer (REST) accepted by a majority of the Internet community. The API provides support for merchants to create, read, update or delete all the the resources of their shop, like products for example. One current limitation is that you cannot programmatically create an order, due to security concerns around credit card numbers. Almost all e-commerce companies offer some sort of API but there is a clearly a difference in the degree of maturity and the amount of thought that has gone into some of them. The Shopify API is proving to be very helpful for merchants that need advanced capabilities. Whenever the general question is asked "Can Shopify do such and such?", the right answer to the question is usually "Yes it can, you need to use the API for that custom functionality or feature."

Shopify has established a hosted e-commerce platform transacting hundreds of millions of dollars per year for tens of thousands of merchants. If all the many requested features those merchants demanded were added to the core of Shopify, the platform would become unstable and prone to outages, breakdowns and a destroyed reputation for reliability. Developers would have to become familiar with a constantly changing system. By offering an API built around a core set of resources Shopify has enabled an ecosystem of App developers to come together and create unique and necessary offerings to make running an e-commerce shop on the Shopify platform easier for merchants. Developers need only learn the API and they can then apply their knowledge to any shop for any merchant. 

A good example of extending a shop for a merchant is the task of fulfilling an order using the API and an App. Shopify has an option allowing a merchant to select from a few fulfillment companies. What happens when you check out that short list and you do not see an acceptable option? Your supply chain from manufacturer DrubbleZook to warehouse Zingoblork with shipper USPS or Royal Mail is simply not there. But you know every single order can be sent to an App. You know you can select up to 250 orders at once and send them all to an App. So surely an App can be built to handle the fulfillments automatically. An App running in the cloud listening 24/7 for incoming orders. And when it gets an order it robotically follows a set of instructions that ensures the merchant is going to be happy. The App takes the order apart and inspects it. The App knows where each line item is to be sent. It knows the ID of every variant, and whether a discount code was used. It knows the credit card issuer. The App can take the order details and format it for Zingoblork and their special needsm, in a special XML format just for Zingoblork. It is 2012 and the Zingoblork warehouse system runs off of any of the following data exchange mechanisms:

*  a Microsoft DOS server, connected to the Internet by FTP. They only accept CSV files via FTP
*  a Microsoft NT Server, connected to the Internet by sFTP. They only accept CSV files via sFTP
*  Email. The company can only deal with email. They have been around forty years, and it's all email all the time
*  HTTP POST. A modern miracle! A warehouse fulfillment company that actually has modern infrastructure!
*  EDI which we won't even bother to describe, but suffice it to say, the Chevy Vega of exchanges
*  SOAP protocol, for those who would rather wash the car with a toothbrush.

The App receives fresh orders thanks to the API and WebHooks. It processes them and sends them off to the fulfillment company. Once the fulfillment company has accepted the order(s) and sent them off to their final destination as a delivery, the customer needs to know. Some companies will collect all the orders they process for a shop and create a daily manifest of tracking codes assigned to the orders and place those in a holding pen accessible only by a special FTP account. Others will send the tracking numbers to the merchant via email completely destroying the merchant's email inbox and sanity. The best fulfillment companies will send the tracking numbers and order ID directly back to the App, thus allowing the App to automatically create a fulfillment using the API with the tracking number. Shopify automatically detects the creation of a fulfillment and sends the appropriate email. This is wonderful since the App and the API together can close the loop automatically. Once fulfilled, the App closes the order and the merchant has not lifted a finger.

Without an API it would be hard to offer this level of customization to a merchant. Another interesting use of Shopify is when a merchant opens up to sell products on a consignment basis for external vendors. If a merchant accepts 1000 widgets to sell for $20 each, the vendor wants to know if the shop made $20, $400 or even $4000 in sales. If the merchant accepts 1000 widgets to sell on behalf of 20 or 30 different vendors his merchant life will almost certainly be miserable unless the API is used to facilitate the reporting needed. An App records each and every line item sold as a Sale that is assigned to the vendor. Every product has a selling price and a cost price and the difference between those is the profit to be split between the merchant and the vendor(s). The deal with the vendors is to give them an 80/20 split on profits, or perhaps 60/40 splits of that profit. That percentage can be assigned to each sale so that different deals can be made depending on the day of the week, the colour of the sky or the popularity of the product. That is an App that can be plugged into a shop today. None of that is possible without the API. 

The presence and functionality of the Shopify API is crucial to consider in the decision most enterprises work out before going into business with the Shopify platform. If a merchant knows the fixed costs to run a shop for a year are $1000 and that their theme will cost them $5000, the API is the only other option that deserves attention. Adding an App can add to the cost of running a shop, but they can also save hundreds of hours in manual labour. Paying for a custom App to be developed to address a special need can cost a few thousand dollars but can result in measurable growth in sales. Many companies are looking for a reliable hosted e-commerce platform and partner(s) to work with to bring their e-commerce vision to life. The presence and capabilities of the Shopify APIis enough incentive to choose Shopify over competing platforms. 

